Add Presto Mission and Architecture doc (#22356)
prestodb/presto: ARCHITECTURE.md

# PrestoDB: Mission and Architecture

## Introduction

> PrestoDB is an open-source distributed SQL query engine designed for fast analytic queries against data sources of all sizes, ranging from gigabytes to petabytes. It was originally developed by Facebook and later made available to the broader community.  It is governed under the auspices of the Presto Foundation, a member of the Linux Foundation.

Author: Old habits die hard, it's how I learned!

## Mission

### For users

The primary mission of PrestoDB is to enable efficient, high-speed data processing for analytics and batch at scale. It aims to provide a single, unified query system that can access and process data stored in various formats and storage systems. Key aspects of its mission include:

> 1. **High Performance:** Presto strives to exceed data warehouse performance over data lakes.  To achieve this, Presto works to achieve vertical integration over modular portions of the stack.

Author: In works!

2. **Scalability:** Presto is used at extremely large data lakes across the world.  As such, it aims for high degrees of scalability.
3. **Connectivity and Integration:** Presto is designed to be flexible and adaptable to changes in infrastructure.  This includes a highly customizable plugin infrastructure, including pluggable storage connectors.
4. **User-Friendly:** Presto strives to be simple enough for a user to spin up and quickly test out, using familiar ANSI style SQL syntax, sensible default values and an optimizer that produces efficient query plans.

### For developers

Presto aims to accomplish the above goals for users by means of creating a broad, powerful and collaborative open source community that strives for high standards in database engineering and design.

1. **Open Source:** Develop and maintain as an open-source project, encouraging community contributions and collaboration.

> 2. **Broad and open community:** Foster a large and powerful community to drive the project’s adoption and direction.

Author: Active is better

3. **Composability**: Presto is designed for lakes and lakehouses.  As such, it is engineered to fit cohesively in an ecosystem of other tools, and where possible it strives to integrate with industry standard specifications and libraries that help accomplish the user goals above.

> 4. **Coding excellence**: Presto strives to maintain a high bar for contributions.

Author: > 4. **Coding excellence**: Presto strives to maintain a high bar for contributions through good design, good abstractions, rigorous tests, and documentation.

How about this?

> 4. **Coding excellence**: Presto strives to maintain a high bar for contributions.

Reviewer: Works for me!

### Vertical integration in data lakes

Presto aims to be the top performing system for data lakes.  The top priority for the project is to move fully onto a native evaluation engine, particularly Velox, with the same expectations outlined in the vision for users, particularly user-friendliness and connectivity.

Motivations for this effort are numerous:

1. It is expected to be too difficult to achieve Warehouse performance using a Java evaluation engine.  Some optimizations, such as vectorized execution, in particular require flexibility and precision which is difficult to achieve in Java.
2. The Presto community is delegating evaluation to a different community, thereby focusing efforts on improved usability.  We believe that shared components can offer network benefits that closed systems may find difficult to achieve, and such a division of efforts will result in a faster and more robust system overall.

### State-of-the-art Optimizer

Presto’s optimizer can learn from long established techniques in more mature systems to provide better plans by default for users.  We are working on bringing these mature optimization techniques into Presto.

### Modularity

> Originally, the way that Presto interacted with other systems was unique and proprietary to Presto.  With libraries like Velox and DataFusion standardizing execution, Ibis standardizing data frames, Substrait standardizing an IR, and Arrow standardizing data exchange, there is the possibility of a future that emphasizes more interoperability with other data infrastructure.  We believe that if Presto does not adapt to this future, it stands to be left behind.  Moreover, we are first movers in this area with our early usage of Velox.  As a matter of principle and design, we are aligned in the direction of interoperability, and believe this can be both a differentiator for the project, and allow the project to focus more exclusively on features that make users happy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Originally, the way that Presto interacted with other systems was unique and proprietary.  Today, libraries like Velox and DataFusion are standardizing execution, Ibis is standardizing data frames, Substrait is standardizing an IR, and Arrow is standardizing data exchange. These standardizations point to a future that emphasizes interoperability with other data infrastructure. We believe that if Presto does not adapt to this future, it could be left behind.  

In principle and design, we are aligned in the direction of interoperability. We are first movers in this area with our early usage of Velox. We believe that interoperability can be both a differentiator for the project, and allow the project to focus on features that make users happy.
```
A possible revision of this paragraph to two paragraphs, minor suggestions for clarity. 

One consideration is about this: "Substrait [is] standardizing an IR". The abbreviation IR was a stumble for me, I had to look it up in context. Suggest rephrasing or just expanding the acronym.

# PrestoDB: Mission and Architecture

## Introduction

PrestoDB is an open-source distributed SQL query engine designed for fast analytic queries against data sources of all sizes, ranging from gigabytes to petabytes. It was originally developed by Facebook and later made available to the broader community. It is governed under the auspices of the Presto Foundation, a member of the Linux Foundation.

## Mission

### For users

The primary mission of PrestoDB is to enable efficient and high-speed data processing for analytics and batch at scale. It aims to provide a single, unified query system that can access and process data stored in various formats and storage systems. Key aspects of its mission include:

> 1. **High Performance:** Presto strives to exceed data warehouse performance in data lakes. To achieve this, Presto works to achieve vertical integration over modular portions of the stack.

Author: The ultimate goal is to avoid needing another tool.  Traditionally, if you had a Data Lake, eventually you'd need a Data Warehouse that you ingest into from the Data Lake, for things like dashboards and analytics.  Do you have any suggestion on how to reword this?

> 1. **High Performance:** Presto strives to exceed data warehouse performance in data lakes. To achieve this, Presto works to achieve vertical integration over modular portions of the stack.

Reviewer 2: Try saying something like that, I suppose. It's much clearer. I completely did not understand that from the original text. maybe,

Presto operates directly on data lakes without first ingesting the tables into a separate data warehouse. 

or something like that?

> 1. **High Performance:** Presto strives to exceed data warehouse performance in data lakes. To achieve this, Presto works to achieve vertical integration over modular portions of the stack.

Author: `1. **High Performance:** Presto aims to be a single unified query engine suitable for low latency interactive workloads, adhoc and exploratory analytics, and large scale batch workloads. To achieve this, Presto works to achieve vertical integration over modular portions of the stack.`

> 2. **Scalability:** Presto is used at extremely large data lakes across the world. As such, it aims for high degrees of scalability.

Author: Well query implies just reads, but we also do writes.  I think what I need to convey is we read and write large amounts of data, and we do it in highly multitenant environments.  Let me think about how to word this.

> 2. **Scalability:** Presto is used at extremely large data lakes across the world. As such, it aims for high degrees of scalability.

Author: As I mentioned in the row ID RFC, just because Presto only reads columnar data over data lakes, doesn't mean Presto doesn't operate over data lakes.

There is a federation aspect to Presto and there's a data lake query aspect to Presto.  We do both, but we focus (in terms of where we put the majority of our effort) on the latter.  By calling out specifically data lakes, I am trying to call out this focus in the doc.

> 2. **Scalability:** Presto is used to access large amounts of data from data lakes. As such, it aims for high degrees of scalability.

Reviewer 2: Can we avoid the term "data lake"? Unless there's some way that Presto is processing unstructured data that I've missed.

Author: Same answer as here: https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/22356#discussion_r1546799934

3. **Connectivity and Integration:** Presto is designed to be flexible and adaptable to changes in infrastructure. This includes a highly customizable plugin infrastructure, including pluggable storage connectors.

> 4. **User-Friendly:** Presto strives to be simple enough for a user to spin up and quickly test out, using familiar ANSI style SQL syntax, sensible default values and an optimizer that produces efficient query plans.

Author: It is not ANSI SQL, and you are correct that nothing is ANSI SQL.  But we strive for ANSI compliant syntax.  We reference the spec and defer to the spec.  By using the term "ANSI style", I am saying that that is what we strive for, without saying we *are* ANSI SQL.  How would you word this?  It's important to us as a project that we defer to the spec, so it needs to stay in this document somehow.

> 4. **User-Friendly:** Presto strives to be simple enough for a user to spin up and quickly test out, using familiar ANSI style SQL syntax, sensible default values and an optimizer that produces efficient query plans.

Reviewer 2: I still wouldn't use the word ANSI at all, but if you must add quotes around "ANSI style" to weaken it a bit.

> 4. **User-Friendly:** Presto strives to be simple enough for a user to spin up and quickly test out, using familiar ANSI style SQL syntax, sensible default values and an optimizer that produces efficient query plans.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **User-Friendly:** Presto strives to be simple enough for a user to spin up and quickly test out, using SQL syntax that strives towards ANSI compliance, sensible default values, and an optimizer that produces efficient query plans.
```
I don't recommend quoting "ANSI style" in the document. Air or scare quotes emphasizing a word or phrase to convey irony or skepticism should be avoided because the meaning of the quoted words in the documents becomes vague. Scare quotes tell the reader that the words here aren't exactly what is meant but the writer hasn't clearly explained what the writer means to say, only that the quoted words aren't quite it. 

For one example of discussion, see heading 4 (Set apart a word to show irony, sarcasm, or skepticism (scare quotes)) in [Quotation Marks: Rules and Examples](https://www.grammarly.com/blog/quotation-marks/).  

My suggested change "using SQL syntax that strives toward ANSI compliance" adapts part of @tdcmeehan's explanation in [his comment](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/22356/files#r1546801463), softening the implied claim by emphasizing the goal and that Presto SQL isn't there yet.

> 4. **User-Friendly:** Presto strives to be simple enough for a user to spin up and quickly test out, using familiar ANSI style SQL syntax, sensible default values and an optimizer that produces efficient query plans.

Reviewer 2: "Scare quotes" I'll have to remember that term in the future, but it is exactly what I wanted to convey.

Let me put it this way: if PrestoSQL is ANSI style SQL, with or without scare quotes, what is a dialect that is not ANSI style? What can a reader practically infer by knowing that PrestoSQL is ANSI style SQL as compared to simply knowing that it's SQL?

> 4. **User-Friendly:** Presto strives to be simple enough for a user to spin up and quickly test out, using familiar ANSI style SQL syntax, sensible default values and an optimizer that produces efficient query plans.

Author: @elharo there are varying degrees of compliance toward the spec.  As I've explained, our intention is to hew toward the spec where possible, whereas other systems do not have any such intention.  What do you think of @steveburnett's writing suggestion above, do you think that conveys this message?

> 4. **User-Friendly:** Presto strives to be simple enough for a user to spin up and quickly test out, using familiar ANSI style SQL syntax, sensible default values and an optimizer that produces efficient query plans.

Author: @elharo a dialect that is not ANSI style is Spark SQL (prior to Spark 3.x).  It is called SQL, but differs in many ways from the ANSI standard, to the extent that there is now an ANSI mode in 3.x that differs from the old, non-ANSI mode prior.

### For developers

> Presto aims to accomplish the above goals for users by creating a broad, powerful, and collaborative open source community that strives for high standards in database engineering and design.

Reviewer 2: the above goals for users --> these goals

1. **Open Source:** Develop and maintain as an open-source project, encouraging community contributions and collaboration.
2. **Broad and open community:** Foster a large and active community to drive the project’s adoption and direction.
3. **Composability**: Presto is designed for lakes and lakehouses. As such, it is engineered to fit cohesively in an ecosystem of other tools, and strives to integrate with industry standard specifications and libraries that help accomplish the user goals above.
4. **Coding excellence**: Presto strives to maintain a high bar for contributions through good design, good abstractions, rigorous tests, and documentation.

## Architecture

> Presto follows a distributed system model with a coordinator and multiple worker nodes. [See Presto Concepts for more information.](https://prestodb.io/docs/0.285.1/overview/concepts.html#server-types)

Reviewer 2: can this link be version independent?

Reviewer: https://prestodb.io/docs/current/overview/concepts.html#server-types

Long term initiatives in Presto [have corresponding project boards](https://github.com/prestodb/presto/projects?query=is%3Aopen). Current progress can be roughly understood by looking at the project boards.

## Long Term Vision

### Vertical integration in data lakes

Presto aims to be the top performing system for data lakes. The top priority for the project is to move fully onto a native evaluation engine, particularly [Velox](https://velox-lib.io/), with the same expectations outlined in the vision for users, emphasizing user-friendliness and connectivity.

Motivations for this effort are numerous:

> 1. It is expected to be too difficult to achieve data warehouse performance using a Java evaluation engine. Some optimizations, such as vectorized execution in particular, require flexibility and precision which is difficult to achieve in Java.

Reviewer 2: "to achieve data warehouse performance" isn't really a goal. I think we just want to say we think C++ will be faster

2. The Presto community delegates evaluation to a different community to focus our efforts on improved usability. We believe that shared components can offer network benefits that closed systems may find difficult to achieve, and such a division of efforts will result in a faster and more robust system overall.

### State-of-the-art Optimizer

Presto’s optimizer can learn from long established techniques in more mature systems to provide better plans for users. We are working on bringing these mature optimization techniques into Presto.

### Modularity

Originally, the way that Presto interacted with other systems was unique and proprietary.  Today, libraries like Velox and DataFusion are standardizing execution, Ibis is standardizing data frames, Substrait is standardizing an intermediate representation of plans, and Arrow is standardizing data exchange. These standardizations point to a future that emphasizes interoperability with other data infrastructure. We believe that if Presto does not adapt to this future, it could be left behind.  

> In principle and design, we are aligned in the direction of interoperability. We are first movers in this area with our early usage of Velox. We believe that interoperability can be both a differentiator for the project, and allow the project to focus on features that make users happy.

Reviewer 2: we are aligned in the direction of --> we favor
